# Understanding Views in Django

When building a web application, whether static or dynamic, handling HTTP requests and returning appropriate responses is essential. In Django, views play a crucial role in processing these requests and generating responses for the end-users. Let's delve into the concept of views and how they are implemented in Django.

## Basics of Views

In Django, a view is a Python function responsible for handling web requests and returning web responses, typically in the form of HTML documents. Unlike static websites, where serving files directly suffices, Django requires defining view functions to manage dynamic content.

## Static File vs. Dynamic File

For a static file, the HTTP request merely maps to the file's location, and the server returns the page for rendering. However, in Django, a Python function, known as a view, must be created to serve dynamic content. This function resides in the `views.py` file within the Django app.

## Anatomy of a View Function

A typical view function in Django begins by importing necessary modules, such as `HttpResponse` from `django.http`. It then defines the function, often taking an `HttpRequest` object as its parameter. Inside the function, you can perform various tasks, such as processing data, interacting with databases, or rendering templates.

## Routing URLs to Views

To ensure that view functions are invoked upon receiving specific URL requests, Django employs URL routing. This involves mapping URLs to corresponding view functions. This mapping is configured in the `urls.py` file of the app. Each URL pattern is associated with a particular view function.

## Implementation Steps

1. Create a view function in the `views.py` file.
2. Configure URL routing by defining URL patterns in the `urls.py` file.
3. Map each URL pattern to its corresponding view function using the `path` function.

By following these steps, developers can effectively handle HTTP requests and deliver dynamic content to users, thus enhancing the functionality and interactivity of Django-powered web applications.


# views.py
```python
from django.http import HttpResponse

def home(request):
    content = <html><body><h1>Welcome to litle lemon</h1></body></html>
    return HttpResponse(content)
```


# urls.py(app)
```python
from django.urls import path
from . import views

urlpatterns =[
    path('', views.home),
]
```
