# Django fields

In this reading, you will learn about different field types in a model class.

## Model

A model in Django is like any normal Python class. The ORM layer maps this model to a database table in the Django project. Each attribute of a model class represents a field in the table.

The Django ORM enables storing and retrieving data in tables, not by executing raw SQL queries, but by invoking the model methods.

A model class subclasses the `django.models.Model` class. A typical definition of a model class is done inside the app's `models.py` file.
### models.py file
```python
from django.db import models

class Person(models.Model):
    first__name = models.CharFied(max_length=100)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
```

When you migrate this model (you need to include your app in the `INSTALLED_APPS` setting), the `myapp_person` table will be created as would be done by the `CREATE TABLE` query:

```sql
CREATE TABLE Persons(
    ID Integer PRIMARYKEY,
    first_name VARCHAR(100),
    last_name VARCHAR(100),
)
```

Note that the `first_name` and `last_name` are the class attributes corresponding to the fields in the table.

Django automatically names the table as `appname_modelname`, which you can override by assigning the desired name to `db_table` parameter of the `Meta` class, to be declared inside the model class.

```python
class Student(CommonInfo):
    # ...
    class Meta(CommonInfo.Meta):
        db_table = 'student_info'
```

You should choose the model field type appropriate for the data stored in the mapped field.

The types are defined in `django.forms` module. The choice of type determines the HTML widget to use when the form field is rendered. For example, for a `CharField`, HTML's text input type will be used.

Django also auto-creates the form based on model definitions (it is called ModelForm), using field types.

## Field properties

A `Field` object has common properties in addition to the field-specific properties.

- `primary_key`: This parameter is `False` by default. You can set it to `True` if you want the mapped field in the table to be used as its primary key.

- `default`: You can also specify any default in the form of a value or a function that will be called when a new object is created.

```python
class Person(models.Model):
    name = models.CharField(max_length=20),
    address = models.CharField(max_length = 50, default = 'Harare')
```

- `unique`: If this parameter in the field definition is set to `True`, it will ensure that each object will have a unique value for this field.

```python
tax_code = models.harField(
    max_length = 20,
    unique = True
)
```

- `choices`: If you want to create a drop-down from which the user should select a value for this field, set this parameter to a list of two-item tuples.

```python

SEMESTER_CHOICES = (
    ("1","Civil"),
    ("2","Electrical"),
    ("3","Mechanical"),
    ("4","CompSci"),
)

# desclaring a student's model

class Student(models.Model):
    semester = models.CharField(max_length = 20, choices = SEMESTER_CHOICES, default = 1)

```

## Field types

The `django.models` module has many field types to choose from.

- `CharField`: This is the most used field type. It can hold string data of length specified by `max_length` parameter. For a longer string, use `TextField`.

- `IntegerField`: The field can store an integer between -2147483648 to 2147483647. There are `BigIntegerField`, `SmallIntegerField`, and `AutoField` types as well to store integers of varying lengths.

- `FloatField`: It can store a floating-point number. Its variant `DecimalField` stores a number with fixed digits in the fractional part.

```python
class Student(models.Model):
    grade = models.DecimalField(max_digit=5, decimal_places=2)
```

- `DateTimeField`: Stores the date and time as an object of Python's `datetime.datetime` class. The `DateField` stores `datetime.date` value.

- `EmailField`: It’s actually a `CharField` with an in-built `EmailValidator`.

- `FileField`: This field is used to save the file uploaded by the user to a designated path specified by the `upload_to` parameter.

- `ImageField`: This is a variant of `FileField`, having the ability to validate if the uploaded file is an image.

- `URLField`: A `CharField` having in-built validation for URL.

## Relationship fields

There can be three types of relationships between database models:

- one-to-one
- one-to-many
- many-to-many

The `django.models` module has the following fields for establishing relationships between models.

- `ForeignKey`: It is used to establish a one-to-many relationship between two models. It requires two positional arguments - the model with which it is related, and the `on_delete` option to define the behavior of the delete operation.

Suppose you have a `Customer` and `Vehicle` model with a one-to-many relationship. A customer can have more than one vehicle.

```python
class Customer(models.Model):
    name = models.CharField(max_length = 20)

class Vehicle(models.Model):
    name = models.CharField(max_length = 20)
    customer = models.ForeignKey(Customer, on_delete =  models.CASCADE, related_name = 'Vehicle')
```

The `on_delete` option specifies the behavior in case the associated object in the primary model is deleted. The values are:

- `CASCADE`: deletes the object containing the `ForeignKey`
- `PROTECT`: Prevent deletion of the referenced object
- `RESTRICT`: Prevent deletion of the referenced object by raising `RestrictedError`

Now let’s expand upon these values in more detail:

**CASCADE**: If the `on_delete` parameter is set to `CASCADE`, deleting the reference object will also delete the referred object. Suppose a vehicle belongs to a customer. When the Customer is deleted, all the vehicles that reference the customer will be automatically deleted.

**PROTECT**: The effect of the `PROTECT` option is the opposite of `CASCADE`. It prevents the deletion of a referenced object if it has an object referencing it in the database. If a customer has vehicles, it cannot be deleted. It’s important to know that if you forcefully delete the customer, Django raises the `ProtectedError`.

**RESTRICT**: The difference between `PROTECT` and `RESTRICT` is that when you delete the referenced object, the `on_delete` option raises the `RestrictedError`. The deletion of the referenced object is allowed if it also references a different object that is being deleted in the same operation, but via a CASCADE relationship.

Let’s use the example of an `Artist` model – a CASCADE relationship with an `Album` and `Song` model. The `Artist` model, in turn, has a `RESTRICT` relationship with the song model.

```python

class Artist(models.Model):
    name = models.CharField(max_length=25)

class Album(models.Model):
    artist = models.ForeignKey(Artist, on_delete=models.CASCADE)

class Song(models.Model):
    artist = models.ForeignKey(Artist, on_delete = models.CASCADE)
    album = models.ForeignKey(Album, on_delete = models.RESTRICT)



```

Next, you can create a few instances of these models:

```shell
>>>artist_one =  Artist.objects.create(name = 'Mufaro')
>>>artist_two =  Artist.objects.create(name = 'Conel')
>>>album_one = Album.objects.create(artist = artist_one)
>>>album_two = Album.objects.create(artist = artist_two)
>>>song_one = Song.objects.create( artist = artist_one, album = album_one)
>>>song_two = Song.objects.create(artist = artist_one, album = album_two)
```

You can safely delete the `artist_one` instance. If you try to delete `artist_two`, the `RestrictedError` is raised.

- `OneToOneField`: This field in one of the models establishes a one-to-one relationship between the two models. Although a ForeignKey field with `unique=True` setting behaves similarly, the reverse side of the relationship will always return a single object.

```python
class college(models.Model):
    CollegeID = models.IntegerField(PrimaryKey = True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
    strength = models.IntegerField()
    website = models.URLField()

class Principal(models.Model):
    college = models.ForeignKey(college, on_delete = modelS.CASCADE)
    Qualification = models.CharField(max_length = 50)
    email = models.EmailField(max_length=50)
```

- `ManyToManyField`: This field helps in setting a many-to-many relationship between two models. Here, multiple objects of one model can be associated with multiple objects of another model. For example, in the case of `Subject` and `Teacher` models, a subject is taught by more than one teacher. Similarly, a teacher can teach more than one subject. This is represented in the following model definitions:

```python
class Teacher(models.Model):
    TeacherID = models.IntegerField(PrimaryKey = True) 
    Qualification = models.CharField(max_length = 50)
    email = models.EmailField(max_length = 50)

class Subject(models.Model):
    subject_code = models.IntegerField(PrimaryKey = True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length = 50)
    credit = models.IntegerField()
    teacher = models.ManyToManyField(Teacher)
```

In this reading, you learned about the different fields to be used as the type of attributes in a model class.
